Cairn
=====

Three programs are in this folder.

  cairnd          a node. It holds the whole chain, checks every rule for
                  itself, and takes nobody's word for anything.
  cairn-wallet    a wallet. It is a node too, so it also takes nobody's
                  word for what you own.
  cairn-explorer  a node that also serves the website, from your machine,
                  reading your chain.

This is testnet-4, a test network. Its money is worth nothing, it is meant
to be worth nothing, and the network will be reset. Nothing on it carries
over to anything.


Running a node
--------------

  ./cairnd

That is the whole command. The addresses it starts from are written into
the program, like the first block, so it finds the network by itself. It
writes a status line every ten seconds:

  [00:04:00] height 41  peers 3  known 5  cold 0  work 5637144576

height is how many blocks it has. peers is how many nodes it is talking to.
Stop it with Ctrl-C. Start it again and it picks up where it left off.

To start somewhere else instead, name a peer: --seed <address>. That
replaces the written-in list rather than adding to it.

On Windows, run cairnd.exe from a terminal the same way.


Using the wallet
----------------

  ./cairn-wallet new mine.key         make a key, once
  ./cairn-wallet address mine.key     the address people pay you at
  ./cairn-wallet balance mine.key     what it holds
  ./cairn-wallet open mine.key        open it as a page in your browser

The page is served on this machine only, at an address carrying a secret,
and the wallet answers nothing without it.

Back up mine.key. It is the only thing that can spend what it holds, and
nobody, including us, can replace it or recover from its loss.


Your computer will warn you about these files
---------------------------------------------

macOS will say the program cannot be checked for malicious software.
Windows will say an unrecognised app was blocked. Both are saying the same
true thing: these programs are not signed by a certificate their maker paid
for, so the operating system has no name to show you.

On macOS, tell it you know where the files came from:

  xattr -d com.apple.quarantine cairnd cairn-wallet cairn-explorer

There is a better check than a certificate, and you can run it yourself.
Every release is built in public by GitHub, from a commit you can read, with
a log you can read, and each file is signed with an attestation saying which
commit produced it. To verify:

  gh attestation verify <the archive you downloaded> --repo cairnchain/cairn

That asks GitHub, not us. Or compare the hash of what you downloaded against
the SHA256SUMS file published beside it:

  shasum -a 256 <the archive you downloaded>        macOS and Linux
  certutil -hashfile <the archive> SHA256           Windows

If you would rather not run a binary at all, the source is at
https://github.com/cairnchain/cairn and builds with one command.

The version in this folder is in the file named VERSION, and each program
prints it when it starts.


Licence
-------

MIT or Apache 2.0, whichever you prefer. Both are in this folder.
